Sensitivity tells us given we
know a patient has a disease,
what is the probability that
the model predicts positive?
In the clinic, the doctor using an AI model
may be interested in a different question.
And that is given the model
predicts positive on a patient,
what is the probability that
they actually have the disease?
This is called the positive
predictive value or PPV of the model.
Similarly, while specificity asks,
what is the probability the model predicts
negative, given a patient is normal?
The doctor may be interested in knowing
the probability that a patient is normal,
given the model prediction is negative.
This is called the negative
predictive value or NPV of a model.
Let's compute the PPV and
NPV on an example.
Once again, we have ten examples on
which a model has made its predictions.
First, let's compute PPV.
PPV can be computed as the fraction of
positive examples that are also disease.
So in the denominator,
we'll have the number of positive
which is one two, three four.
And in the numerator,
the number that is positive and disease.
So that's one, that's two and
we just have two, so
2 over 4, or 0.5.
Let's now look at NPV.
NPV can be computed as the fraction of
negative examples that are also normals.
So in the denominator, we're looking
at everywhere the model prediction is negative,
it's one, two,
three, four, five, six.
And in the numerator all
the places where it's negative and
the ground truth is normal.
So that's one, that's two,
that's three, that's four,
and that's five, so
this 5 over 6, or 0.83.
Now that we've seen PPV and NPV,
in addition to sensitivity and
specificity, let's look at how
they relate to each other.